Add AI assistant skills for DQX (#1125)
databrickslabs/dqx: docs/dqx/docs/guide/ai_tools_skills.mdx

> ---

Reviewer: I think it would be better to have it under guide, not dev.

## Install

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="genie" label="Databricks Genie Code" default>

Copy the `skills/` folder into either a workspace-level or user-level skills directory:

```bash
# Option A — workspace-wide (all Genie Code users see these)
databricks workspace import-dir skills /Workspace/.assistant/skills

# Option B — current user only
databricks workspace import-dir skills /Users/$(databricks current-user me --output json | jq -r .userName)/.assistant/skills
```

Genie Code picks them up automatically — no restart. Confirm with Agent mode:

> *"List the DQX skills you can use."*

In Agent mode the skill fires when its description matches your request; you can also `@`-mention a specific skill (e.g. `@dqx-define-checks add a uniqueness check on order_id`).

Details: [Databricks Genie Code — Skills](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/genie-code/skills).

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="claude" label="Claude Code">

The `skills/` directory is a complete Claude Code plugin (see [`.claude-plugin/plugin.json`](https://github.com/databrickslabs/dqx/blob/main/skills/.claude-plugin/plugin.json)). Add the DQX repo as a marketplace once, then install:

```bash
# Inside Claude Code

> /plugin marketplace add databrickslabs/dqx

Reviewer: **Marketplace install path likely doesn't work as written.** For `/plugin marketplace add databrickslabs/dqx` to resolve, Claude Code needs a `.claude-plugin/marketplace.json` at the **repo root** that enumerates the plugin(s). This PR only adds `skills/.claude-plugin/plugin.json` — that defines the plugin itself but doesn't make the repo a marketplace.

Two ways forward:

1. **Add a `.claude-plugin/marketplace.json` at the repo root** listing this plugin (typical pattern for single-plugin marketplace repos). Then the marketplace add + install flow works as documented.
2. **Drop the marketplace step** and tell users to install directly. The `cp -R skills/dqx-* ~/.claude/skills/` fallback already shown below works without a marketplace manifest — that may be sufficient on its own.

As is, users following the documented Claude Code path will hit `marketplace add` failing on a missing manifest at the repo root.

/plugin install dqx@databrickslabs-dqx
```

Or drop the folder into your personal skills directory for a one-off install:

```bash
cp -R skills/dqx-* ~/.claude/skills/
```

> Each skill becomes available as `/dqx:dqx-define-checks` (plugin-installed) or as a normal skill (user-level). Claude auto-invokes on description match.

Reviewer: **`/dqx:dqx-define-checks` syntax conflates two things.** Skills aren't slash commands — slash commands start with `/` and are typed verbatim by users, but skills are auto-invoked by Claude based on description match or referenced in conversation, not typed as `/...`. For plugin-installed Claude Code skills, the canonical reference is `<plugin>:<skill>` (no leading slash), e.g. `dqx:dqx-define-checks`.

Suggest:

```suggestion
Each skill becomes available as `dqx:dqx-define-checks` (plugin-installed) or as a regular skill (user-level). Claude auto-invokes on description match; no slash-command syntax is needed.
```

Reviewer: not 100% sure on that

Author: I think this one is incorrect.

| `dqx-apply-checks` | Validating a DataFrame or table against a set of rules | [Applying Quality Checks](/docs/guide/quality_checks_apply) |
| `dqx-end-to-end` | Read → check → write in one call with `apply_checks_and_save_in_table` | [End-to-end apply](/docs/guide/quality_checks_apply#applying-checks-defined-with-dqx-classes) |
| `dqx-profile-and-generate` | Profiling and generating rule candidates with `DQProfiler` / `DQGenerator` | [Data Profiling](/docs/guide/data_profiling) |
| `dqx-storage` | Loading / saving checks across file, workspace, volume, table, installation, and Lakebase backends | [Loading and Storing Quality Checks](/docs/guide/quality_checks_storage) |

Each skill is a folder containing a single `SKILL.md` with the standard `name` + `description` frontmatter. Tools auto-load skills based on the description; users can also invoke them explicitly (`@dqx-define-checks`, slash commands, etc.) depending on the tool.

## Install

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="genie" label="Databricks Genie Code" default>

Copy the `skills/` folder into either a workspace-level or user-level skills directory:

```bash
# Option A — workspace-wide (all Genie Code users see these)

> databricks workspace import-dir skills /Workspace/.assistant/skills

Reviewer: **Install assumes a local checkout that the user may not have.** The `skills` argument here is a local source path. Someone reading this page hasn't necessarily cloned the DQX repo — running this command will fail with "no such file".

A one-line preface fixes it:

> Clone or download the DQX repo first, then run from the repo root:

Same applies to the Claude Code `cp -R skills/dqx-*` fallback below.

```bash
# Inside Claude Code
/plugin marketplace add databrickslabs/dqx
/plugin install dqx@databrickslabs-dqx
```

Or drop the folder into your personal skills directory for a one-off install:

```bash
cp -R skills/dqx-* ~/.claude/skills/
```

Each skill becomes available as `/dqx:dqx-define-checks` (plugin-installed) or as a normal skill (user-level). Claude auto-invokes on description match.

Details: [Claude Code — Plugins](https://docs.claude.com/en/docs/claude-code/plugins).

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="other" label="Other AI dev tools">

Any tool that follows the [Agent Skills](https://agentskills.io/) open standard can load these skills as-is. Generic install:

1. Copy the per-skill folder into the tool's configured skills directory.
2. Make sure the path contains `SKILL.md` directly (not nested one level deeper).
3. Restart the tool if it caches on startup.

If your tool expects a single flat Markdown file instead of a folder, concatenate:

```bash
cat skills/dqx-define-checks/SKILL.md > dqx-define-checks.md
```

> 

Reviewer: **"Concatenate" example is a single-file copy.** The framing says concatenate but the command just renames one file. Either drop the framing (it's just a `cp` with a new name) or use multiple inputs to actually concatenate, e.g.:

```bash
cat skills/dqx-*/SKILL.md > dqx-skills.md
```

Minor — but as written it's slightly misleading.

1. Copy the per-skill folder into the tool's configured skills directory.
2. Make sure the path contains `SKILL.md` directly (not nested one level deeper).
3. Restart the tool if it caches on startup.

<Admonition type="note" title="Flattening skill files">
If your tool expects a single flat skills file instead of a directory with multiple files, concatenate the files:

```bash
cat skills/dqx-*/SKILL.md > dqx-skills.md
```
</Admonition>
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Using DQX skills

After installing DQX skills, you can either let your tool use skills automatically or invoke them by name. Typical prompts:

```
Add a DQX uniqueness check on (order_id, line_item_id) to my pipeline.
Split my bronze table into valid and quarantine outputs using these rules: …
Profile catalog.schema.orders and suggest quality checks.
Load DQX checks from a Delta table and apply them to a streaming DataFrame.
```

Agents will load the relevant skill into context, follow its patterns, and link back to the canonical documentation for anything outside the skill's scope.

> ## Extending DQX skills

Reviewer: **"Scope and guardrails" only lives in `skills/README.md` (still open from previous round).** The three intentional design choices currently in `skills/README.md` (declarative YAML / dict form by default, always import from `databricks.labs.dqx.*`, link to canonical docs over duplicating) are useful design context for users extending DQX skills. They belong on the docs site under this "Extending DQX skills" section so they're discoverable from `databrickslabs.github.io/dqx`, not only from the GitHub README.
